This is St. John's Lutheran Church. It's
located here in the central part of
Madison, Wisconsin. And can we just take
a second to appreciate how amazing
Madison is? One of the only cities in
the US located on an ismouth, the state
capital of Wisconsin and home to the
University of Wisconsin. It's a
fantastic city and it's suffering from a
problem most fantastic cities suffer
from a shortage of affordable housing.
By some accounts, it's been about 20
years since any new explicitly
affordable housing has been built in
downtown Madison, and prices are rising
all over the metro area. The
congregation and leadership at St.
John's Lutheran are very aware of the
problem. This church has long supported
Madison residents in need through
shelter meals, emergency rent payments,
help with utility bills, and more. This
is a congregation that is deeply
invested in serving its community. It's
also a congregation that doesn't need a
building as large as it has right now.
So, they decided to do something
radical. tear down their existing church
and build a 10-story building with 130
units of affordable housing on top of
their old church site. They will still
have space in that new building for a
small church on the ground floor.
They're also planning other community
spaces to continue their mission of
serving the underserved in Madison. It's
a huge change that reflects the
congregation's desire to help the
community they love so much. This is a
personal story for me, too, because this
was my grandparents church. I went to
church services there. My parents got
married in that building. It's going to
be sad to lose that space they have now.
There's just so many memories there, but
it's hard to argue that they're not
converting it to the best possible use
for them. They have the support from the
city and the county, and they've
received a lot of funding they need to
make it happen, but they're still a
little short. So, if you're interested
in the project and want to help, you can
donate. I'll leave a link in the
description. I'm not just highlighting
St. John's because I happen to know
about this church. I'm highlighting it
because it's a great example of how many
faith-based organizations across the
United States are interested in serving
their communities by building homes.
Some of these organizations have extra
land or extra parking. they'd like to
convert to housing. The problem is in
many cases they can't do that. Their
city zoning code doesn't allow housing
on religious land uses or the church or
temple or mosque is located on land
zoned primarily for lowdensity housing.
Luckily, there's a growing movement in
the US that wants to change this and let
faith-based organizations have their
freedom to build more affordable housing
for their communities. The movement is
called Yiggby. Yes, in God's Backyard.
This is a play on Nimi, not in my
backyard, and Yimi, yes in my backyard.
Let's talk about housing with a higher
power after the bike bell.
[bell]
Solutions to the housing crisis are
often niche and incremental. A policy
change here, an ADU there, maybe some
infill development, and Yiggby housing
isn't a silver bullet, but it has the
potential to be a pretty big deal. One
estimate by the Lincoln Institute of
Land Policy has faith-based land in the
US totaling 2.6 million acres, or a
little less than the area of
Connecticut. The same study found that
there are over 800 vacant parcels owned
by religious groups in the Washington DC
area alone. The state of Massachusetts
could have enough developable
faith-based land for 140,000 units of
affordable housing. Nobody's thinking
that every single parcel will get
developed. But that's a pretty big
number to start with before it gets
whittleled down to parcels that will
actually be developed. And it's not just
vacant land that could be used for
housing. The St. John's example proved
that. Sometimes it's the land the
churches are on or the churches
themselves that could be housing. This
is because more old churches are closing
each year that can be replaced by new
congregations moving in. Each year,
church closures outnumber church
openings by 50%. It's increasingly
common for a church that once held 500
people, to see maybe a few dozen elderly
members. The financial math to maintain
the building no longer pencils out. Some
congregations are looking to real
estate, including the building itself,
as a way to pay the bills and stay
afloat. And there's just some vacant and
unused churches out there waiting to be
repurposed. Not everyone is excited
about potentially demolishing church
buildings to build housing. And I'm not
just talking about local nimbies.
Churches, temples, mosques, and
synagogues can be beautiful historic
buildings. Some religious leaders
believe it's morally wrong to take a
sacred space and develop it into a
secular use. According to Christianity
Today, progressive congregations seem
more inclined to consider building
affordable housing on church property or
turn their church into affordable
housing. Like the St. John's example at
the top of the video. Conservative
congregations favor preservation and
maintaining the status quo. Despite
these concerns, there's still a ton of
land to work with. But the reality is
that just having the land isn't enough.
Faith-based organizations may have built
up a lot of goodwill in their
communities, but that doesn't give them
a free pass with the zoning code or with
local nimbies. They still have the same
constraints as any developer would, and
in some cases more because the land they
own may not be zoned for housing at all.
To illustrate this, let's go back to
Madison, Wisconsin, but to a different
church. City Church on the east side is
located in a neighborhood full of single
family homes, and their underlying
zoning is for single family homes. Just
like most zones meant for lowdensity
residential, there's some wiggle room
built in, some exceptions. In this zone
in Madison, duplexes are allowed, so are
daycare centers, parks, playgrounds, and
community gardens. Churches are also
allowed, though sometimes they need to
receive some additional approvals. What
is not allowed is multif family housing.
This means that if this church wanted to
build some apartments on this lawn here
or in their parking lot, they couldn't.
So, the land just sits there underused.
This exact situation is why leaders of
religious organizations and housing
advocates have teamed up to propose new
state laws. One prominent example is
California's Senate Bill 4, passed in
2023. Yes, this channel has a California
bias, and I'm not afraid to admit it.
The bill allows faith-based
organizations as well as nonprofit
colleges to build affordable housing on
their property by right, even if the
zoning code says they can't. So, if City
Church in Madison was in California,
they'd be able to build affordable
housing. The city would have to let
them. There are some stipulations built
into the law. A mosque, for example,
couldn't just go building a skyscraper
filled with luxury apartments. The
allowed height for housing is one story
greater than the maximum allowed on the
site or any adjacent parcel. It also has
to be affordable housing, not market
rate housing. 20% can be set aside for
moderate income housing and 5% can be
set aside for staff of the organization.
Think a rectory for a church or faculty
housing at a university. Even better,
Senate Bill 4 also exempts faith-based
organizations from environmental review,
speeding up the development process
considerably. What kind of impact could
this new law have in the state? Well, a
study by the Turner Center at UC
Berkeley found that this new law opened
up a ton of new land for housing. We're
talking an area nearly five times the
size of the city of Oakland. And the
cool thing is that about half this land
is located in really nice neighborhoods,
the kind with great schools and economic
opportunity. When low-income people are
in those neighborhoods, there's a
greater likelihood that they will
thrive. This bill won't concentrate
poverty, but instead provide
opportunities and ensure fairness.
Another really nice benefit of this law
is that most of the faith-based
organization land is located in single
family neighborhoods. This obviously
limits the height for affordable
housing, but it also allows higher
density affordable housing in
neighborhoods that otherwise would not
allow it. There are many, many single
family neighborhoods that don't have any
affordable housing at all, but they do
have a church, synagogue, or mosque.
It's like these religious institutions
have infiltrated these single family
neighborhoods and now have the power to
sneak in some affordable housing like
Trojan horses. This approach is proven
to work, too. Let's take a look at
Berkeley, California for a second. A
real bastion of nimism in California.
Just for example, look at the North
Berkeley BART rapid transit station.
It's surrounded by single family houses.
That's crazy. This neighborhood has
historically fought tooth and nail
against density here. But anyway, All
Souls Episcopal Parish in Berkeley
worked with a nonprofit housing
developer to build 34 homes on their
property. It was the first affordable
housing development in North Berkeley in
30 years. Yiggy can be the loophole
needed to get these neighborhoods to
build affordable housing. California
isn't the only state that passed the
Yigby law recently. Florida, to its
credit, did so in 2025. There are some
differences between the California law
and the Florida law, but this new
Florida law is good, too. In Florida,
faith-based organizations can build
housing so long as 10% is affordable.
So, they can actually build a lot of
market rate housing, way more than
California. It's nice that there's some
flexibility there. The law does require
faith-based organizations to hold
worship services on site, however, or on
an adjacent site. Just as in California,
the opportunity in Florida is enormous.
There are an estimated 30,000 parcels in
the state that could host new housing in
the future. Local governments aren't
letting state governments have all the
fun. Cities across the US have also made
it easier for their faith-based
organizations to build more housing.
These cities include Seattle, New York,
and Atlanta. The hope in Atlanta is that
their program could result in 2,000 new
affordable homes over the next 8 years.
The Yiggby idea has even found its way
to Washington DC. Former Ohio Senator
Sherid Brown introduced a Yiggby bill in
the Senate. The bill aims to reduce the
barriers to building housing on
faith-based organization land and
provide technical assistance for those
organizations to actually develop the
housing. The bill never passed and
shared Brown isn't in the Senate
anymore, but maybe someday we'll have a
national Yiggby law. So, states are
introducing and passing Yiggby laws and
so are cities. And there's even
something brewing in Washington DC. But
what if we didn't need Yiggby laws at
all to allow religious groups to build
affordable housing? During my research
for this video, I came across a really
interesting argument that faith-based
organizations implicitly have the right
to build housing so long as it's
consistent with their religious
doctrine. If a city tried to prevent the
construction of that housing, they'd be
violating the organization's First
Amendment right to freely exercise their
religion. First of all, it's actually
not that hard for religious to show that
providing housing to the poor is
consistent with religious texts. For
example, both Christian and Jewish
faiths can point to this piece of
scripture that directly addresses the
need for the pious to provide housing
for those in need. But the First
Amendment doesn't mean that local
governments cannot regulate religious
uses at all. I mean, I just told you in
this video that local governments can
tell a church which zones they're
allowed in and which zones they're not
allowed in. There is a federal law that
sets the boundaries for what local
government can and can't do. It's called
R Lupa, the Religious Land Use and
Institutionalized Person Act passed in
2000. Here's the relevant bit of the law
on screen. I'm not going to read all of
this. Feel free to pause if you'd like
to. The gist is that if a government
action substantially burdens a religious
institution like say a zoning code
would, the government must show that the
burden serves a compelling public
interest. Zoning so far has been
considered a compelling public interest.
This new argument suggests that if a
local government prevented a church, for
example, from building affordable
housing, it could be substantially
burdening that religious institution and
preventing the free exercise of that
religion without a compelling public
interest. A solid argument could be made
that preventing the construction of
affordable housing during a housing
crisis is the opposite of a compelling
public interest. And like we've
established, building low-income housing
could be seen as essential to the
expression of that religion. This
argument has not been tested yet, like
at the Supreme Court level, but I
thought I'd share it with you because I
think it's really interesting and gets
to the heart of the relationship between
local governments and faith-based
organizations. What do you think? Should
faith-based organizations be allowed to
build whatever housing they want? And is
this the answer to the housing crisis?
If you've made it this far in the video,
I'm guessing you love cities, and I have
a recommendation for all the city lovers
out there. It's for a series called
Beyond the Bleachers. It's a three-part
look at the differences between North
American and European stadiums. But it's
not looking just at the stadium
buildings themselves, but also at the
location of the stadiums within their
respective cities. It's a really nice
lens to be looking at the differences
between American and European planning.
I highly recommend that you check it
out. It's available over on Nebula. And
if you want more city planning content,
there's a ton of it over on Nebula, all
ad free. We're talking City Nerd, Not
Just Bikes, Downey Live, Steuart Hicks,
Wendover Productions, and other great
cities and transportation channels. On
top of all that, I also have exclusive
urbanist content on Nebula 2. My great
cities series profiles some of the most
iconic parts of the world's most
important cities. I also produced
Planning Ancient Rome, a
never-before-seen visual history of the
ancient city. It's some of my best work
because Nebula provided additional
resources and it's only available on
that platform. You can get all of this
for a surprisingly affordable price. And
when you sign up at my link, nebula.tv/
citybut, you'll get 50% off an annual
subscription.
My channel will even get a portion of
that subscription fee as long as you
stay subscribed. So, it's one of the
best ways to support me and this
channel. Nebula is also offering
lifetime memberships for people who want
to go above and beyond in their support
of my channel and the platform. They
normally cost $500, but right now for
the holidays, we're offering 40% off of
those as well. That's only 300 bucks for
unlimited Nebula for life. And if you
want to help others support City
Beautiful, Nebula now offers gift cards.
You can give someone a month, a year, or
a lifetime of Nebula. Now, I know these
are popular gifts. I've heard it from my
subscribers. They're perfect for
lastminute holiday giving. So, go start
your free trial and watch right now by
clicking on the link in the description.
Thanks.